# How to Train a Horse #

	  Horses are powerful, inquisitive, and intelligent animals.  Horses are unique for several characteristics.  They are a fight or flight animal.  Because they have no way to defend themselves, like a lion who has claws, a horse’s only other option is to run from danger.  Therefore, a horse is considered an animal of prey.  Only when they have no alternative will the horse stay and face the danger.  Another characteristic that makes a horse unique from other animals is their variety of ability.  Horses are quick footed and can cover long distances.  The next unique characteristic is their curious personalities.  Horses love to observe new things in their territory.  When something is new they will not immediately approach it.  Instead the horse will circle the new object until they know it will not threaten them.  Because of their curious personality horses are animals that think and react.  This is one reason why horses have been a valuable asset to man.  Over the course of history the horse has consistently been relied on by man.  Man has used horses for work, companionship, and transportation throughout history.  In today’s modern society, horses are not needed for transportation; however, they are still used for companionship, recreational activities, and work.  
	The use of the horse is still desired today.  Unlike the old western movies, where the cowboys ride the horse until it was done bucking, the training today is more focused on the psychology and physicality of the horse.  Training a horse takes time, consistency, and respect of the horse.  Throughout this paper, I will walk through the most productive process on how to train a horse.  Training a horse is not breaking a horse.  The term breaking is less desired than training, even though many people use them interchangeably, due to people wanting to avoid breaking the spirit of the horse (Meredith).  The ultimate desired horse is one that the rider can ride without the worry of it purposefully throwing the rider off or acting aggressively.   There are several aspects that go into training a horse for a specific job; however, for the purpose of a generic well trained horse, the basics will allow anyone be able to have a safe horse to ride.   

## Getting to Know the Horse ##

	The first step to training any horse is getting to know the horse.  If the horse had a previous owner, then the best step is to ask the owner the history of the horse.  What is the horse like on a daily basis?  What are some issues with the horse?  What is the horse most reactive to?  These are just three basic questions to ask in order to further the knowledge on that specific horse.  If the horse is young that is just beginning any kind of training then it is best for the trainer to spend time with the horse to study its behavioral patterns.  Once the trainer feels like he knows the horse well, then he can move onto the next step of training.

## Ground Work ##

	The step following getting to know the personality of the horse is laying out the ground work.  Ground work has many components.  It includes desensitizing the horse, showing the horse who the leader of the team is, and make the horse think about what is going on instead of reacting to how they feel.  
	Depending on what resources are available to the trainer will depend on their approach to these training techniques.  However, the best way to begin training the horse is within a round pen.  The round pen allows the trainer to make the horse move their feet and gain superiority over the horse.  Why make the horse move their feet?  Horses are a fight or flight animal.  Their feet is their main source of defense.  The horse’s feet is like the old saying a horse without four legs is a dead horse.  In order to function to their fullest potential, horses need all of their legs; therefore, if the trainer and gain control over the horses feet, then the horses brain will understand who is in charge (Hartstone).  In order to get the horse to learn what the trainer wants of them, the train will need a lunge whip and a round pen.  The whip is not used for beating the horse.  Only when the horse does not obey will the whip be used as a source of correction.  Instead the whip is used as just an extension of the trainers arm.  This allows the trainer to have bigger motions while being a safe distance away from the horse in case the horse were to kick.  The trainer will begin by sending the horse around the pen with a consistent pace. The trainer will ask the horse to change directions occasionally to make the horse use both sides of their brain.  When the horse relaxes and shows no sign of disobedience, then the trainer will allow the horse to stop and rest.  This action provides the horse with the knowledge that the trainer is the one who decides what to do and when to do it. Another part of the ground work in the round pen is desensitizing the horse.  In order to have a safe and enjoyable ride for both the horse and the rider, the horse must be trained to not spook at everything they are not used to seeing or hearing.  The whip is a great tool for desensitizing as well for the beginning stages.  The first step to desensitizing the horse to the whip is to rub it all along their body.  The trainer will want to begin at the back/rib cage of the horse because it is the least reactive part of the horse.  From there the trainer can move the whip around the hind quarters and onto the neck and face (Downunder Horsemanship).  Another technique of desensitizing the horse with the whip is by taking the whip in the hand of the trainer and rotating their arm in a circular motion a safe distance away from the horse while having the horse on a lead rope.  Even if the horse begins to move around like they are scared it is important to stay with the horse at a safe distance, at the side of their shoulder, so they will eventually have to calm down and realize the whip is not a threat.  The trainer will do this with both arms and above the horses head in order for the horse to be use to the noise and movement around their entire body.  After these desensitizing exercises, the trainer can gradually grow with other objects, obstacles, and movements.	 
  
## Under Saddle ##

	After desensitizing the horse, working through the round pen, and establishing leadership, the trainer can begin introducing the tack.  Just like anything else that is new to the horse the tack will have to be gradually introduced.  The tack at the beginning will mostly be the blankets/pad and saddle.  The bridal and reins will be added into the training once the horse is comfortable with a saddle on its back.  It is best to place the tack alongside the round pen and continue the exercises so the horse can show interest.  Once the horse shows interest in the saddle and blankets, the trainer needs to allow the horse time to investigate the new items.  After the horse is used to the saddle and blankets, then the trainer will take the blankets and rub them over the entire body of the horse.  The trainer will proceed with the same approach for the saddle.  It is best for the first time of placing the saddle on the horse’s back to gradually set the saddle down instead of throwing it on top of the horse’s back.  That way the horse is not sacred again of something heavy coming towards them quickly.  Once the saddle and blankets are on the horse, then the cinch and girths can be tied.  The trainer then should go ahead and ask the horse to move around the pen while still on a lead rope.  The horse may buck for a little while, which is perfectly fine.  As long as they do not continue bucking for an extended amount of time.  It will take the horse a few minutes to figure out that the saddle will not come off of their back.  Once the horse figures out that they cannot remove the saddle from their back, they should calm down and continue on in their stride around the pen.  As the horse realizes that it is unable to get the saddle off of their back, then once a rider is in the saddle, the horse will not fight to get the rider off as well.  After the saddle and blankets, then the bridle and reins can be introduced.  Some trainers may begin with a hackamore bridle just so the horse will become use to the feel of something controlling their head.  Other trainers may begin with a simple curb bit or snaffle bit.  As long as the horse is comfortable with the bit and the bit fits correctly, then the choice is left to the trainer.  Once the bridle is on the horse, the trainer will ask the horse to go around the pen again to give the horse another few minutes to become use to it.  After the horse is comfortable with all these new items on him, then the rider can move onto adding himself to the back of the horse.  For this next step of adding a rider to the horse, it is best to have another person there for safety.  It is beneficial for the secondary person to step inside the round pen and ask the horse to do the ground exercises while the rider is on the back of the horse (Downunder Horsemanship).  This allows the horse to become use to the feel of the added weight.  Gradually the secondary person will minimize their control of the horse’s attention and give it over to the rider.  Once the rider has all control, then the horse will not have to follow a person standing on the ground.  Once the horse becomes comfortable with the rider then all the ground work can be added from the back of the horse.  Gradually the rider can build the horse’s skills until he has the horse he so desires for riding.
  
## Conclusion ##

Training a horse takes much time and consistency.  Working with a horse every day for weeks produces the best results.  The reason for so many small steps when introducing something new to the horse is to allow them to think about it.  If the horse does not have time to think about what is happening to them, or what the trainer is asking him to do, then the horse could act more aggressive or scared.  Just like humans, the horse wants to think about what they are doing or what is happening before moving onto a harder level.  This is why it is important to start a horse with introductions and ground work.  Less accidents are prone to happen when the trainer is keeping them and the horse safe.

## FAQ ##

1. How long does it take to train a horse?

2. What if my horse is not getting better?

3. How do I fix incorrect training on my horse?

4. 

## Sources ##

“10-Day Fundamentals Clinic at the Ranch.” Downunder Horsemanship ICal, downunderhorsemanship.com/.
“Breaking In.” Hartstone Equestrian: Jody Hartstone and Lusitano Stallion Ali Baba | Equitation Science Training | Coaching and Lessons, www.hartstoneequestrian.com/Horse-Training/Breaking-In.
“BreakingVs.Training.”MeredithManor.edu, www.meredithmanor.edu/features/articles/drm/breaking.asp.
“Training Your Horse.” The Spruce: Katherine Blocksdorf 
